# Scrutinizing-Commencement-Speeches-With-NLP

What goes behind a commencement speech given to a graduating class? Can we classify the speeches by the common takeaway messages given to the audience by the speakers? Do orators opt for a positive delivery or chose to deliver their speeches in a more solemn and serious tone? In this project, we unearth the nature of commencement speeches with NLP techniques.

We explore the overall sentiment the speaker uses when delivering their message. When giving a speech to inspire a young audience, do orators tend to be optimistic and gleeful at the potential prospects of the audience members, or do they adopt a more solemn tone with the hopes of educating and inspiring the audience? The textblob library is used to perform a sentiment analysis on the text data.

In terms of sentiment, all of the speakers adopt a rather neutral stance, with polarity values ranging from -0.05 to 0.25. On face value, this implies that the speeches focused less on invoking emotion and more on relaying wisdom onto the audience. This is unsurprising for people like Elizabeth Warren and Tim Cook who give speeches that are direct and to the point. However, these results draw scepticism since some of the orators chosen are known for being entertaining when given the change to speak. People like John Green and Connor O'Brien often use humor in their deliveries, yet their sentiment scores are only around 0.1.

Finally, the study aims to see if these speeches can be categorized based on the messages that they deliver. Can we distinguish commencement speeches from each other simply based on their root message? To answer this, the Latent Derechlet Allocation (LDA) method is used to cluster the speeches into groups. The number of groups the speeches are split into will be decided by which LDA returns the most meaningful results.

Surprisingly, the LDA has not yielded any meaningful results regardless of the number of groups the speeches are split into. A lot of the groups share key words with each other, making it difficult to identify an actual topic for each group. Upon a thorough study of all the speeches used in the study, this is a reasonable outcome. Although the orators, the audience, and the nature of the delivery of the speeches differ, the actual content of the speeches are glaringly similar. Each speech starts with some generic introduction, followed by a personal adecdote, and ends with a key message that the audience should take from their story. The language used was very similar and the key takeaway message were very similar amoung the speakers (e.g. never give up, treat each other with kindness).

In summation, this project sheds light on how unoriginal commencement speeches can be. In terms of sentiment, the speeches are overall neutral, with the optimism from the audience's graduation countering the pessimism from the emphasis on the issues the audience will face. The topic modeling with LDA did not return tangible results. the most common words for each topic often overlaped regardless of the number of groups the speeches would be split into. These results are coherent with the actual content of the speeches. Regardless of the status and reputation of the orator or the message they send, they all stick to a eerily similar format. They congratulate the audience and their families for their achievements, give a personal anecdote to show insight into their personal stuggles and succeses, and then end the speech with a few words of wisdom and motivation. This cookie cutter approach is used for all speakers, from the jovial Mindy Kaling to the astute Tim Cook. All in all, this report really shows that these speeches are given mainly bolster the reputation of the schools who organize the event. They chose to invite people with status to enrich the event and justify the significance of graduation. While the identities of the speakers play a big role in commencements, the actual contents of the speeches are unimaginative. 
